Add ECH confirmation signal (#287)
tlswg/draft-ietf-tls-esni: draft-ietf-tls-esni.md

extensions. If an unsupported mandatory extension is present, clients MUST
ignore the `ECHConfig`.

> # The "ech" Extension {#encrypted-client-hello}

Reviewer: Very minor nitpick: Looks like most other TLS extensions are left unabbreviated. It does mean we lose the nice parallel between `ech_nonce` and `ech_outer_extension`, though if we pick up https://github.com/tlswg/draft-ietf-tls-esni/pull/292, the former will go away. Dunno how important a prefixed `ech_outer_extension` is.

Author: I'll revert to the old name and we can revisit extension naming once the dust settles.

~~~

The extension request is carried by the ClientHelloOuter, i.e., the ClientHello
transmitted to the client-facing server. The payload contains the `outer`
variant of the following `ClientECH` structure:

~~~~
    enum { outer(0), inner(1) } ClientECHType;

    struct {

>        ClientECHType type;

Author: I think it's fine as is. To summarize:

| Message | Payload |
|--------------|------------|
| ClientHelloOuter | ClientECH (outer variant) |
| ClientHelloInner | ClientECH (inner variant) |
| EncryptedExtensions | ServerECH |

: The serialized and encrypted ClientHelloInner structure, encrypted using HPKE
as described in {{send-ech}}.

When offering the "ech" extension in its ClientHelloOuter, the client MUST also
offer an "ech" extension in its ClientHelloInner. The payload is a string of 8

> bytes generated by a secure random number generator.

Author: Good idea! Done.

Re <digression>: The tag is only a byte, so the minimum ClientECH is 10 bytes.

## Handling the server response {#handle-server-response}

As described in {{server-behavior}}, the server MAY either accept ECH and use
ClientHelloInner or reject it and use ClientHelloOuter. In handling the server's

> response, the client's first step is to determine which was used. To do so, it

Reviewer 2: Nit: s/which/which ClientHello/

Author: Did s/which/which value/. I don't think we should be calling ClientHelloInner a "ClientHello", since ClientHelloInner isn't a handshake message on the wire.

> inspects the last 8 bytes of the ServerHello.random: if this string is equal to

Reviewer 2: Nit: I would refactor the sentence beginning with "To do so". Something like this?

> The client presumes acceptance if the last 8 bytes of the ServerHello.random are equal to the ClientHelloInner's "ech" extension payload. Otherwise, it presumes rejection.

Author: Good idea! Done.

## Client-Facing Server

Upon receiving an "encrypted_client_hello" extension, the client-facing server
MUST check that it is able to negotiate TLS 1.3 or greater. If not, it MUST
abort the connection with a "handshake_failure" alert.

The ClientECH value is said to match a known ECHConfig if there exists
an ECHConfig that can be used to successfully decrypt
ClientECH.encrypted_ch. This matching procedure should be done using
one of the following two checks:

1. Compare ClientECH.config_id against identifiers of known ECHConfig
   and choose the one that matches.
2. Use trial decryption of ClientECH.encrypted_ch with known ECHConfig
   and choose the one that succeeds.

Some uses of ECH, such as local discovery mode, may omit the ClientECH.config_id
since it can be used as a tracking vector. In such cases, trial decryption
should be used for matching ClientECH to known ECHConfig. Unless specified by
the application using (D)TLS or externally configured on both sides,
implementations MUST use the first method.

If the ClientECH value does not match any known ECHConfig structure, it
MUST ignore the extension and proceed with the connection, with the following
added behavior:

> - It SHOULD include the "encrypted_client_hello" extension in its

Author: Is MUST appropriate here? SHOULD should suffice, since the client would regard ECH as "securely disabled".

> - It SHOULD include the "encrypted_client_hello" extension in its

Author: Done, in light of your comment on #292.

be ignored by all other servers in the deployment when not negotiating ECH,
including servers which do not implement this specification.

## Backend Server Behavior {#backend-server-behavior}

When the client-facing server accepts ECH, it forwards the ClientHelloInner to
the backend server, who terminates the connection. The backend server confirms
that ECH was accepted as follows. Per {{encrypted-client-hello}}, the

> ClientHelloInner contains an "ech" extension whose payload is a randomly

Reviewer 2: Style nit: so far, the spec has been hyphenating "randomly-generated".

Author: Done.

be ignored by all other servers in the deployment when not negotiating ECH,
including servers which do not implement this specification.

## Backend Server Behavior {#backend-server-behavior}

When the client-facing server accepts ECH, it forwards the ClientHelloInner to
the backend server, who terminates the connection. If the ClientHelloInner
contains an empty "encrypted_client_hello" extension, then the backend server
MUST confirm ECH acceptance by setting ServerHello.random[24:32] to

~~~~
    accept_confirmation = HKDF-Extract(0,

>         ClientHelloInner.random + SrverHello.random[0:24])[0:8]

Reviewer: s/SrverHello/ServerHello/

>         ClientHelloInner.random + ServerHello.random[0:24])[0:8]

Reviewer 3: Did we decide that HKDF-Extract was OK? We never use raw HKDF-Extract anywhere else in TLS 1.3.

Author: It seems fine to me, since the ClientHelloInner.random is secret and we need is a pseudorandom string. I'll take another look at the HKDF paper and get back to you. (Also, it would be great to hear from others on this.)

Author: Judging from [1, Section 6], just using HKDF-Extract might be fine, but it seems rather "hacky". I think we should err on the conservative side and use HKDF-Extract-then-Expand. Will update the PR to reflect this.

be ignored by all other servers in the deployment when not negotiating ECH,
including servers which do not implement this specification.

## Backend Server Behavior {#backend-server-behavior}

When the client-facing server accepts ECH, it forwards the ClientHelloInner to
the backend server, who terminates the connection. If the ClientHelloInner
contains an empty "encrypted_client_hello" extension, then the backend server
MUST confirm ECH acceptance by setting ServerHello.random[24:32] to

~~~~
    accept_confirmation = HKDF-Expand-Label(
        HKDF-Extract(0, ClientHelloInner.random),
        "ech-eccept-confirmation",
        ServerHello.random[0:24], 8)
~~~~

where HKDF-Expand-Label and HKDF-Extract are as defined in {{RFC8446}}. The
value of ServerHello.random[0:24] is generated as usual by invoking a secure

> pseudorandom number generator.

Author: Done.

Optional record digests may be useful in scenarios where clients and
client-facing servers do not want to reveal information about the client-facing
server in the "ech" extension. In such settings, clients send

> either an empty config_digest or a randomly generated config_digest in the

Reviewer 2: (I lied, here's the one place we did not hyphenate "randomly generated".)

Author: Ack. "randomly generated" only appears at one point in the text, which is not related to this change.

SHOULD take steps to minimize or protect such requests during certificate
validation.

## Abuse of ECH Acceptance Signal

To signal acceptance, the backend server overwrites 8 bytes of its
ServerHello.random with a value provided by the client. (See
{{backend-server-behavior}} for details.) In the presence of an active
adversary, this behavior increases the likelihood of the ServerHello.random
colliding with the ServerHello.random of a previous session, potentially
reducing the overall security of the protocol. However, the remaining 24 bytes
provide enough entropy to ensure this is not a practical avenue of attack.

On the other hand, the probability that two 8-byte strings are the same is
non-negligible. This poses a modest operational risk. Suppose the client-facing
server terminates the connection: if the last 8 bytes of its ServerHello.random
coincide with the value chosen by the client, then the client will incorrectly
presume acceptance and proceed as if the backend server terminated the
connection.

> Note thatthe same bytes of the ServerHello.random are used to signal to the

Reviewer 2: s/thatthe/that the/

Author: Done.

SHOULD take steps to minimize or protect such requests during certificate
validation.

## Abuse of ECH Acceptance Signal

To signal acceptance, the backend server overwrites 8 bytes of its
ServerHello.random with a value derived from the ClientHelloInner.random. (See
{{backend-server-behavior}} for details.) In the presence of an active
adversary, this behavior increases the likelihood of the ServerHello.random
colliding with the ServerHello.random of a previous session, potentially
reducing the overall security of the protocol. However, the remaining 24 bytes
provide enough entropy to ensure this is not a practical avenue of attack.

On the other hand, the probability that two 8-byte strings are the same is
non-negligible. This poses a modest operational risk. Suppose the client-facing

> server terminates the connection, i.e., ECH is rejected for ignored: if the last

Reviewer 2: s/for/or

SHOULD take steps to minimize or protect such requests during certificate
validation.

## Abuse of ECH Acceptance Signal

To signal acceptance, the backend server overwrites 8 bytes of its
ServerHello.random with a value provided by the client. (See
{{backend-server-behavior}} for details.) In the presence of an active
adversary, this behavior increases the likelihood of the ServerHello.random
colliding with the ServerHello.random of a previous session, potentially
reducing the overall security of the protocol. However, the remaining 24 bytes
provide enough entropy to ensure this is not a practical avenue of attack.

On the other hand, the probability that two 8-byte strings are the same is
non-negligible. This poses a modest operational risk. Suppose the client-facing

> server terminates the connection: if the last 8 bytes of its ServerHello.random

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
server terminates the connection, but does not process the ech extension: if the last 8 bytes of its ServerHello.random
```

Author: Changed to "i.e., ECH is rejected or ignored"

SHOULD take steps to minimize or protect such requests during certificate
validation.

> ## Abuse of ECH Acceptance Signal

Reviewer 5: Why is this Abuse? "ECH Acceptance Signal Collisions" seems to better capture the text below.

Author: The title is meant to encompass all possible attacks that exploit the acceptance confirmation signal. How about "Attacks Exploiting Acceptance Confirmation"?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Attacks Exploiting Acceptance Confirmation
```

To signal acceptance, the backend server overwrites 8 bytes of its
ServerHello.random with a value derived from the ClientHelloInner.random. (See

> {{backend-server-behavior}} for details.) In the presence of an active
> adversary, this behavior increases the likelihood of the ServerHello.random

Reviewer 5: I understand that technically the active adversary can try to exploit this to find matching sessions, but I think the notion might just confuse readers.

```suggestion
{{backend-server-behavior}} for details.) This behavior increases the likelihood of the ServerHello.random
```

Author: Agreed. Done.

colliding with the ServerHello.random of a previous session, potentially
reducing the overall security of the protocol. However, the remaining 24 bytes
provide enough entropy to ensure this is not a practical avenue of attack.

On the other hand, the probability that two 8-byte strings are the same is
non-negligible. This poses a modest operational risk. Suppose the client-facing
server terminates the connection (i.e., ECH is rejected or bypassed): if the
last 8 bytes of its ServerHello.random coincide with the confirmation signal,
then the client will incorrectly presume acceptance and proceed as if the

> backend server terminated the connection.

Reviewer 5: Can we be explicit with the collision probability? (RFC8446 reserves two sentinel values for the downgrade signals.) We might also note that this probability is equivalent to that of network or transport failures, so in practice it's not much of a concern.

Author: > Can we be explicit with the collision probability?

Done.

> (RFC8446 reserves two sentinel values for the downgrade signals.)

Not sure what this comment is about.

> We might also note that this probability is equivalent to that of network or transport failures, so in practice it's not much of a concern.

Would you mind suggesting text for this? I'm not sure I know enough about TCP to be accurate about this.

Reviewer 5: Ah, missed this. I'll file an issue to add it!

> Note that the same bytes of the ServerHello.random are used to signal to the
> client that an earlier version of TLS was negotiated (see {{RFC8446}}, Section
> 4.1.3). The backend server's signal of acceptance does not interfere with this
> mechanism because ECH is only supported in TLS 1.3 or higher.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Note that the same bytes of the ServerHello.random are used to implement
downgrade protection for TLS 1.3 (see {{RFC8446}}, Section
4.1.3). The backend server's signal of acceptance does not interfere with this
mechanism because ECH is only supported in TLS 1.3 or higher.
```

Author: Done.

for ExtensionType (defined in {{!RFC8446}}):

1. encrypted_client_hello(0xff02), with "TLS 1.3" column values being set to

>    "CH, SH, EE", and "Recommended" column being set to "Yes".

Reviewer 6: Does this design variant ever send the ECH extension in the ServerHello?  Or is it only in the Encrypted Extensions?

Author: Only in EE.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   "CH, EE", and "Recommended" column being set to "Yes".
```
